for promotion and tenure were good standards in
the department kind of tough there were a couple of
people that came through who didn't make who were
actually let go uh so as uh dean as dean byers
becomes vice president for academic affairs earl
cook follows him correct describe earl cook as the
dean Well, Earl was a little different than Byers.
I don't really remember too much. He was more
involved than Byers was. But you could never go by
that, because Byers was such a quiet kind of guy.
And things got done, and things were really
running very well under Byers' tenure. Cook
continued that. He continued to do a good job. He
was more visible and more vocal. But the quality of
the college stayed high during his tenure. For a
guy over in the history department then, I and my
colleagues thought geosciences got favorite
treatment. We thought you all were living off the
good land. We were. There's no question about
that. I think that's true. I think we did get
favored treatment. We didn't teach very many
courses. We had a lot of research. Some of our
faculty were very highly paid. I was not one of
them. But I can understand why you felt that way in
history. When you got here, the decision had
already been made for women to be admitted, the
Corps to be volunteer, racial integration,
higher admission requirements, but we didn't yet
have women's dormitories. Were there some female
students in geophysics in your early years? Oh,
there weren't. The first few years, there weren't
any. As a matter of fact, there were a lot of core
kids that were in the geophysics program. But
shortly thereafter, after the first few years, we
then got a big influx of female, women students.
And they were amongst our best students, no
question about it. I've always felt this was a bad
way waste of a resource not to take the women and
make them part of our society. Even today, we have
these glass ceilings or whatever they are. Bad
sets of criteria that they keep people who can do
things from doing the things that they should do,
make the contributions that they can make. Earl
Rudder was president when you first got here. Do
you remember any impressions you and your
colleagues had of him? Yeah, he was a tough guy. But
at the same time, he was a hard-working guy. He was
really interested in A&M. He really wanted to make
it into a first-class university. I think that was
clear. I do remember one thing, though. I talked to
him after one meeting, and I asked him, why don't
you set up the faculty senate? I said, it would be to
your advantage to have one. And he just gave me this
one look which indicated, look it, buddy. The
troops don't tell the generals what's going to
happen around here. So he was sort of an
authoritarian figure. Of course, all of A&M at
that point was very authoritarian. It was not very
democratic. I think we've gone a little too
democratic. at this point to tell you the truth. I
sort of have the feeling that we have the inmates
running the asylum and we could use a little more of
that tough leadership at the head. Do you remember
President Rudder coming to speak to the
geosciences faculty? No, I don't. He may have, but
I don't remember. I don't remember many such
college-level functions. Then when he died in
1970, Jack Williams became the president. Do you
have any recollections of him? It seemed like he
did a pretty competent job. I did not interact very
much with the president. I was busy here in the
troops, on the front lines, dealing with students
and the other faculty. And I've never gotten very
interested in administration. I've never tried
to get into administration. And of course, I never
have, other than being acting head for a couple of
years.
Under Williams, they built some women's dorms.
That was one of his conditions. Accepting the job
was that he could designate a dorm in January of 71
that would be for women, take an existing dorm. You
don't remember any sudden change in women in
geophysics, do you? Well, that's about when it
happened, yes. It was in the early 70s. I could go, I
got my grade book there, I could look and we could
see what the males and the females are if you're
really interested. Oh, now that reminds me of
something. What was your What was your grading
methodology? Did you grade on the curve, or on what
basis did you assign grades? Yeah, I graded on a
curve, essentially. But it was not an absolute
curve. As a matter of fact, most of the exams that I
gave were generally three or four questions with
two or three parts to them. They were generally
problem solving and writing type questions. They
were not multiple choice. And so I couldn't do it on
the grade by by the numbers sort of thing. Of
course, but again, there were 15 kids in the class.
And it really would have been unconscionable on my
part to make a multiple choice test in the grade
that way. So each exam was gone over with a fine
tooth comb. Multiple partial credit was given to
all the students. And I found, as a matter of fact, I
even wrote a paper that with 10 students, you could
easily get a Gaussian distribution. And it may be a
distribution with one of the tails missing or
something like that. Usually, the lower tail was
generally missing. But you can tell. You know that
there are really bright kids in the class, and they
get to the top grade. And you look at how it starts to
tail on off. If it tails off tremendously down to
the last guy, well, then maybe he should flunk. But
if it tails off not all that much on down to the last
guy, well, obviously this kid has learned
something. And I also had some absolute standards
as to what I wanted the kids to learn from my course.
So I looked to see if they had gotten that much
information out of it. So I failed very few kids.
But that's not surprising because, first of all,
they were all seniors, mostly all seniors or
juniors, the undergraduates, number one. And
they were, in this group of kids, a really super
bright number two. So I felt that if anybody really
failed, it was my fault more than theirs. Looking
back over 30 years, did you come to any general
impression about which high schools produced
some of the best students? No, not really. I don't
think I ever really paid attention to that. So they
were scattered in terms of background. Yeah,
because we didn't have that many students. And
it's not like we were getting a lot of students from
Texas that we could look at it. And so therefore, we
really paid attention to the SAT scores and the
grade point averages and the letters of
recommendation and not so much which school it
was. But I do recall there were some schools that we
felt more favorably inclined to. And I don't
remember which ones they were, but there were some
schools that had a better reputation. In those
early years, you taught, you said, two or
sometimes three courses. Right. What were those
courses, and what was the general content of your
normal workload? OK. The courses were
exploration, seismology, which had a lab
associated with it. And so it was three hours of
lectures, three hours of- Junior? That was a
senior level course. There was a junior level
course which was experimental exploration
geophysics, which also had a lab associated with
it. It was three hours lecture and a four hour lab.
And let's see, there was also, the other course was
the physics of the Earth's interior. And I've also
taught the geophysical data processing, which is
how to manipulate the seismic data and digital
data and handle stuff like that. Those are the
undergraduate courses. But I also taught the
graduate level courses in theoretical
seismology, continuum mechanics, physics of the
Earth's interior, a migration course. What were
some of the others?
I did a... Theoretical seismology, earthquake
seismology. Yeah, the theoretical seismology. I
never did do the gravity and magnetics at the
graduate level. Dave Falk was always did that one.
But those were the ones that I taught. And then, of
course, the seminar courses. Who was the
departmental student advisor in the late 60s and
70s? I was the graduate advisor all that time. We
only had one, of course. The undergraduate
advisor, I believe, rotated. Rick Carlson did it
for a while, but even before then, Dave Falkus was
the one who seemed to spend most of the time at it. He
was always very, very interested in the students.
Of course, Terry Spencer also would advise the
students, but only when there were problems the
department had. Again, there weren't very many
students, so there really wasn't a lot of work to
do. As the graduate advisor, what were normally
the topics that you needed to help them with? What
were their problems? Yeah, the problem was they
weren't as good as our own undergraduates. And
what they really need was the math and the physics.
Most of them had the geology, and they didn't have
the math and the physics. And that was the one that
we needed to get them into. We had a lot of them who
spent the first year or so doing our undergraduate
courses. actually, because they didn't have them
as undergraduates. And they got credit at a time
where you did a master's degree, you could get
credit for undergraduate courses, and it was
worthwhile. And the graduate students would
object to being in those undergraduate courses
because the undergraduates were so good, made it
tough for them. You know, usually the undergrads
complain that you've got graduate students in the
courses, they're making it harder. Well, this was
the other way around, actually. So our graduate
students weren't as good as their
undergraduates. But those were the courses. Now,
surely you must remember some stories of some
student offering some excuse that didn't make
sense for a problem. There probably was a bunch of
those stories, but those are the kind of things
that I just kind of slough them off, you know, and I
really don't think about them. I don't like to
dwell on those things. I like to dwell more on the
positive things rather than the, and I've never
been a collector of stories. Bob Berger's one, and
I know you are one. You're just tremendous at it,
and I'm just not, I'm just not very interested, so I
don't remember them well, unfortunately. Right.
You describe your, beginning and your progress as
a researcher here. What did you start working on
and trace that along? Well, I started as a
researcher when I was a graduate student at UCLA
and did work in wave propagation primarily. Then
when I went to Space General, I worked on antennas
and communication systems. As a matter of fact, I
did an analysis of what today is a GPS system
because the satellites were just coming into use
at that time. People were already thinking about
using satellites for detecting locations on the
ground. As a matter of fact, they had it the other
way around. They had a system whereby uh a downed
pilot would have a transmitter that transmitter
would transmit up to the satellite the satellite
would as it went on by would pick up the signal and
then retransmit it to the thing there and on the
basis of the time that it was received and so forth
so they could pinpoint the guy so he asked me to do a
calculation on that to see just how accurately
they could pinpoint it and i remember i did a
calculation that came out to be something like a
tenth of a meter or something like that. I was
really just fascinated. Of course, I failed to
take into account some of the real serious
problems, like effects of the atmosphere and
noise and jitter in the oscillators and so forth.
And then from there, when I went to MIT, I did
electromagnetic wave propagation, underground
communication. So I was in electrical parts. But
then when I went to MIT, I could have continued with
the electrical part. But Ted Madden was already
there, and he was doing the electrical stuff.
There was nobody doing the seismic. I had done the
seismic before, so I did the seismic. So I did the
seismic stuff. And of course, I had been doing a lot
of data processing and communication theory
stuff, and so I got into the data processing stuff
as well. The laser strain meter was kind of an
outshoot of my electronics and servo mechanism
background and so forth. And then when I got here, I
sort of did the same thing. I got more into data
processing, into theoretical geophysics. I
looked at the chemistry and physics of the Earth,
phase changes and so forth, stuff like that. I've
got maybe 60 publications. All of which are
different. There has not been any one field that
I've really spent my time in other than
geophysics. Looking at that 60 some odd
publications, which was the first one that really
you were proud to claim? Actually, it was the
second paper I did. It was with Leon Knopoff, an
undergraduate student. It was on seismic
reciprocity. And it's still referenced today.
And as a matter of fact, I still write papers, and
still people talk to me about that. And some people
call me Mr. Reciprocity. But that was just one of
the subjects. So that one had the biggest impact.
There were a couple others that were pretty
important. I did the self-focusing antenna
arrays, servo mechanism. I did the communication
system, the underground communications. And
there's a bunch of other ones, too. I'm glad to tell
you about them. All right, after you got here,
which was the first one that you were proud to
mention to your colleagues and so forth? Well,
there's been a couple of them. The first one was
looking at the moho as a solid-solid phase change.
And making the assumption that the moho is a
solid-solid phase change, the moho is down around
30 kilometers or so below the surface of the Earth,
is that there's a density change. And from that,
one can get One could build mountains or make
oceans. And so we did an analysis to show how this
could go about. Unfortunately, nobody accepts
that theory, believes that the Moho is a phase
change. They think it's a chemical change. But
that was one of the first ones that I thought that
was really important. Another one I did was the
non-linear least squares thing, which was really
important in terms of the inverse theory of being
able to extract parameters from data from
nonlinear problems. Most people have solved
linear problems in the past. I did the nonlinear
one and looked at the case of creep and salt as a and
did some work, and the creep and salt was applied.
This nonlinear inverse theory was applied to
creep and salt. So that's another one that is very
important. Then one more recently, well, it's not
so recent, 78 or so, is the bed of nails model. It's
the model for the variation of velocity and
permeability as a function of pressure. And
nobody had done a good theoretical model before I
did it, and I did it. People still don't use it as
much as they should, but they will, I'm sure. So at
first you worked in the atmosphere, but then you
began to work underground. Right. Some of it
applied. Well, it all was underground, actually,
because the seismic wave propagation was also
underground. But that was seismic. Then it went to
the atmosphere. The ionosphere got involved in
the electromagnetic propagation. But actually,
that was propagation with the antennas in the
ground. It was supposed to be communication
between command posts and missile sites. But
nevertheless, the communication actually went
up to the ionosphere through the atmosphere. In
those early years, did the department have any
game plan? Were there some goals for the
department? What did you all hope it would be?
Well, we hoped that what we would do is develop some
good students and develop a reputation so that we
would have a national reputation.
We developed a little bit of one. I think we
certainly developed a good one in exploration
geophysics. We never did develop a very good
reputation in classical geophysics. We'd also
built up a very good reputation in tectonophysics
with the guys in the Center for Tectonophysics.
But the plan, of course, was to have a good program,
a quality program that would bring fame and
fortune to all of us. What other institutions were
kind of the model, hoping to be in the same league
with whom? Well, of course, we would like to have
been in the league of MIT, Caltech, UCLA,
Columbia, Lamont-Doherty. Were there any
regional schools that you all wanted to at least
stay better than? Who were the regional
competitors? Let's see. Actually, there weren't
any. The University of Texas at that point had a
very weak program in geophysics. Rice had a
program. They had a pretty good, and some aspects
of it were good. But it wasn't as strong a program as
ours. If anything, the program that did develop
for a while, and now has sort of gone down the drain,
is one at the University of Houston. And then it
sort of died back there. So yeah, we were always in
competition with those regional programs. And of
course, the University of Texas program has
gotten much better in the recent past.
Were there any opportunities that were missed in
the early years for the department that you can
think of? Yeah, I think there were a lot of missed
opportunities.
The department really would have been a lot better
off if we had all worked together more.
You mean as a team? As a team, yeah. Whereas it
seemed like everybody was pulling their own way,
their own direction. Of course, I was no help
either. It's not like saying it's everybody
else's fault but mine. But I think that if we had
gotten together and cooperated more, it would
have made it into a much better department.
Spencer was the department head at first. How long
did he serve? He served for about ten years. Who
followed him? I was the acting head for two years.
Describe what it was like to be the acting
department head. It was great, really. Everybody
said that it was going to be tough to be acting head
and that I couldn't get along with people and so
forth and so on. Actually, it turned out I had less
problems when I was acting head than when I was not
acting head. Because I guess I was always fighting
the system. When I was acting head, I was the
system. And I had my own ideas about how things
should be done. And I usually had my way of doing
things. And the way in which it was, I would say,
this is the way we're going to do it. If you have any
objections, tell me what your objections are and
why. And if you don't have any objections, this is
the way we're going to do it. So it worked out all
right for a while there. We made some good
progress. We hired some good people and got some
good students and so forth. And then we got Neville
Carter to come. He was the guy who... Describe him
and his strengths. His strengths were his people
strengths. He was a good guy for getting people
involved and getting people to work together. And
he set up the business of doing the five-year plan.
kind of thing where we would have retreats and you
say what are we going to do in the next five years and
stuff like that and actually that was a very good
idea and it it helped I'm sure because we did things
we looked about which way the department wanted to
go and who we were going to try to hire and how we were
going to go get students and so forth and so on so so
he's he was a Also, he was a very good researcher. He
did some excellent research in salt, which was his
main area of interest. He was department head, do
you say, five years? Yeah, I think he was about five
years. And then who follows him? I believe Errol
Hoskins did. Describe him. Well, Earl was a very
low-key guy. And so things were just kind of quiet,
and they just sort of just went along. And
actually, I think that was about the time when the
oil business was getting in trouble anyway. And so
there really wasn't much you could do except sort
of pull your ears in and just hope that you could end
up surviving. And we survived. How did the
downturn in oil prices and so forth in the 80s, how
did that affect the department? It affected the
department quite a bit in the number of students
that would come on in. The enrollment went down
quite a bit. The quality of the students went down.
quite a bit, both as a graduate and the
undergraduate program. So it made a big
difference. It didn't go down as badly as it might
because we did have other strengths. We weren't
just an oil company school, but that was one of our
main areas. And so we were hurt by the oil industry.
Did the contributions from the corporations go
down also? Yes. So scholarships were harder to
produce? Right. And the number of employment
opportunities for the graduates went down. Yes,
but it wasn't really too bad, because the way it was
before is every one of our graduates would end up
with five or six offers when they graduated. And so
now they only had one or two. It would break my
heart, because these were all good, high-quality
companies. And I've always felt that the kids were
better off if they didn't go to work for an oil
company. If they did something different than
that, they probably would have an even better,
more interesting, and more profitable career.
Because my father always told me, he says, Tony,
the best way to be a poor man is to take a job that you
like and to work at it. And that's, of course, what
I've done. And I've ended up being a poor man
because of that. In these 30 years, what have been
the changes in where a geophysics graduate gets a
job? I don't think there really have been any
changes. There always was. The government was a
strong place. Academia was a strong place. There
are all the government labs, for example, and of
course the oil industry, the resource industry.
It's slowed down a little bit in terms of the
resource industry, but it's still there. And all
the other places are still there. But the other
thing is we give them a good training. Kids get
trained in the Earth. They know about the Earth.
They know math. They know physics. They know
logical thinking, problem solving. And we force
them to take courses in English, history,
political science, and all that. We've always
felt that the student should be more than just a
scientist. And so they come out with a tremendous
education. I mean, hell, they could be a history
major. What would they do then?
So I've always felt that the kids had a good
education if they're going into geophysics. I
never felt worried about getting a job, that they
could always get a job. And I used to tell them that a
good guy person knows how to do something never has
to worry about getting a job because there are so
few people in the world that know how to do anything
now the and the kind of job the salaries that they
started out with yes would if we had constant
buying power dollars would those salaries have
kind of followed the price of oil per barrel um like
salaries this year are better than they were in
constant dollars four or five years ago? No, not
really. I mean, there's so much profit and so much
slop in the oil business that the price of the oil is
really almost immaterial, I think. Of course, you
get on down to it. There's a finding cost.
developing costs and so forth for oil is somewhere
maybe three four dollars a barrel and it's never
and now you know in today's money and it's never
been that that price in the last well there's
certainly 20 years and before 30 years ago when it
was down around three dollars a barrel why then the
costs were about a dollar or something like that so
so there's always been a lot of money in there so the
The salaries that the kids get, I think, are more
dependent upon the competition about other
people who would hire them. It's not so much been
the price of the oil, because whatever profits are
available on these things here, that was taken by
the executives. They would give bonuses and go to
the shareholders. It never went to the workers.
I don't think there ever was any real fluctuation
in terms of that. There was a fluctuation in terms
of the number of students that were hired, the
number of positions that were available, but I
don't think there was that much fluctuation in
salaries. Did you all begin to attract
international students? Yes. When? That's been
the more recent past. Well, we always had
international students in our graduate program,
as a matter of fact. Primarily from what areas in
the world? We had them initially from India and
then from Taiwan. And I see that for a long time.
That was it. And then Korea was another place where
we had a strong number of excellent students that
came on in, got their education here in the United
States. It was at the time when we didn't have a big
reputation. And so we had difficulty trying to
attract high quality American students into the
program. This is the graduate program again. And
so we did have a lot of foreign students. More
recently, however, the department
does have a reputation, so we have guys coming from
Saudi Arabia, Malaysia, from Indonesia, from
Russia, China, all over the place, wherever
there's We've had students from South America,
Central America. And you all did not do any
specific recruiting in those overseas areas, did
you? No, no we did not. They came on their own? They
came on their own, but as soon as they made an
inquiry, well, we immediately started talking to
them, and we didn't let any prospect get away, or at
least we worked on them very assiduously. And you
did not mention many European or other Western
hemisphere. No, there weren't many. There were
some who came to the Center for Tectonal Physics,
because we had a gal from Italy and a couple from
Germany that came to tectonal physics. But most of
the ones that were in the petroleum business came
from the Far East and South America. Did you and
your colleagues ever form any general ideas about
which areas produced the most diligent students,
the brightest students, which international
areas?
Not in the USA. Well, actually, you know, most
foreign students always work a lot harder. Okay. I
think of the ones who haven't worked hard, there's
been only one place. There's a kid from, let's see,
from Thailand. I guess it's Thailand. It just
couldn't seem, it may have been just that one
individual. He just couldn't seem to get anything
done. But most of the time, the graduate students
have been very hard workers. Ah, yes.